[PowerPoint] New articles for working with tables and shape bindings (#5105)
OfficeDev/office-js-docs-pr: docs/powerpoint/work-with-tables.md

---
title: Work with tables using the PowerPoint JavaScript API
description: Learn how to create tables and control formatting using the PowerPoint JavaScript API.
ms.topic: how-to
ms.date: 03/31/2025
ms.localizationpriority: medium
---

# Work with tables using the PowerPoint JavaScript API

This article provides code samples that show how to create tables and control formatting by using the PowerPoint JavaScript API.  

## Create an empty table

To create an empty table, call the `Shapes.addTable()` method and specify how many rows and columns the table needs. The following code sample shows how to create a table with 3 rows and 4 columns.

```javascript
await PowerPoint.run(async (context) => {
    const shapes = context.presentation.getSelectedSlides().getItemAt(0).shapes;

    // Add a table (which is a type of Shape).
    const shape = shapes.addTable(3, 4);
    await context.sync();
});
```

> The previous sample does not specify any options, so the table will default to formatting provided by PowerPoint. The following image shows an example of an empty table created with default formatting in PowerPoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous sample doesn't specify any options, so the table defaults to formatting provided by PowerPoint. The following image shows an example of an empty table created with default formatting in PowerPoint.
```

    uniformCellProperties: {
        fill: { color: "darkslateblue" },
        font: { bold: true, color: "white" }
    },
    specificCellProperties // Array values are empty objects at this point.
};
// Set fill color for specific cell at row 1, column 1.
options.specificCellProperties[1][1] = {
    fill: { color: "black" }
};
await insertTableOnCurrentSlide(rowCount, columnCount, options);

```

The previous sample creates a table with a specific format applied to the cell in row 1, column 1 as shown in the following image.

:::image type="content" source="../images/powerpoint-table-specific-cell-format.png" alt-text="A PowerPoint table with the cell in row 1 column 1 formatted with a black background.":::

The previous sample uses the `font` property which is of type `TableCellFontProperties`. The `font` property allows you to specify many properties, such as bold, italic, name, color, and more. The following code sample shows how to specify multiple properties for a font for a cell.

```javascript
options.specificCellProperties[1][1] = {
    font: {
        color: "orange",
        name: "Arial",
        size: 50,
        allCaps: true,
        italic: true,
    }
};
```

> You can also specify a `fill` property which is of type `TableCellFillProperties`. The `fill` property can specify a color and the transparency percentage. The following code sample shows how to create a fill for all table cells using the color "light red" and a 50% transparency.

Reviewer 2: Same here - maybe TableCellFillProperties is an internal type - this isn't available to the public. What we have in the docs is that TableCellProperties.fill is of type FillProperties.

```suggestion
You can also specify a `fill` property which is of type `FillProperties`. The `fill` property can specify a color and the transparency percentage. The following code sample shows how to create a fill for all table cells using the color "light red" and a 50% transparency.
```

```javascript
uniformCellProperties: {
    fill: {
        color: "lightred",
            transparency: 0.5
    },
}
```

## Borders

Use the `TableCellProperties.borders` object to define borders for cells in the table. The following code sample shows how to set the borders of a cell in row 1 by column 1 to a red border with weight 3.

```javascript
const columnCount = 3;
const rowCount = 3;
// Compact syntax to create a 2D array filled with empty and distinct objects.
const specificCellProperties = Array(rowCount).fill(undefined).map(_ => Array(columnCount).fill(undefined).map(_ => ({})));
const options: PowerPoint.TableAddOptions = {
    values: [
        ["1", "2", "3"],
        ["4", "5", "6"],
        ["7", "8", "9"]
    ],
    uniformCellProperties: {
        fill: {
            color: "lightcyan",
            transparency: 0.5
        },
    },
    specificCellProperties
};
options.specificCellProperties[1][1] = {
    font: {
        color: "red",
        name: "Arial",
        size: 50,
        allCaps: true,

>         italic: true,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        italic: true
```

    },
    borders: {
        bottom: {
            color: "red",
            weight: 3
        },
        left: {
            color: "red",
            weight: 3
        },
        right: {
            color: "red",
            weight: 3
        },
        top: {
            color: "red",
            weight: 3

>         },

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        }
```

Use the `TableCellProperties.horizontalAlignment` property to control text alignment in a cell. The following example shows how to set horizontal alignment to left, right, and center for three cells in a table. For a list of all alignment options, see the `ParagraphHorizontalAlignment` enum.

```javascript
const rowCount = 3;
const columnCount = 3;
// Compact syntax to create a 2D array filled with empty and distinct objects.
const specificCellProperties = Array(rowCount).fill("").map(_ => Array(columnCount).fill("").map(_ => ({})));
const options: PowerPoint.TableAddOptions = {
    values: [
        ["Left aligned, top", "\n\n", ""],
        ["Centered", "\n\n", ""],
        ["Right aligned, bottom", "\n\n", ""]
    ],
    uniformCellProperties: {
        fill: { color: "lightblue" },
        borders: {
            bottom: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            left: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            right: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            top: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3

>             },

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            }
```

```javascript
const columnCount = 3;
const rowCount = 3;
const options: PowerPoint.TableAddOptions = {
    values: [
        ["Width 72pt", "Width 244pt", "Width 100pt"],
        ["", "", ""],
        ["", "^\n\nHeight 200 pt\n\nv", ""]
    ],
    // Initialize columns with an array of empty objects for each column.
    columns: Array(columnCount).fill("").map(_ => ({})),
    rows: Array(columnCount).fill("").map(_ => ({})),
    uniformCellProperties: {
        fill: { color: "lightcyan" },
        horizontalAlignment: PowerPoint.ParagraphHorizontalAlignment.center,
        verticalAlignment: 1, //PowerPoint.TextVerticalAlignment.middle
        borders: {
            bottom: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            left: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            right: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            top: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3

>             },

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            }
```

        }
    }
};
options.columns[0].columnWidth = 72;
options.columns[1].columnWidth = 244;
options.columns[2].columnWidth = 100;
options.rows[2].rowHeight = 200;
await insertTableOnCurrentSlide(rowCount, columnCount, options);
```

The previous sample creates a table with three custom column widths, and one custom row height, as shown in the following image.

:::image type="content" source="../images/powerpoint-table-height-width-settings.png" alt-text="A PowerPoint table with different width columns and different height rows.":::

## Specify merged areas

A merged area is two or more cells combined so that they share a single value and format. In appearance the merged area spans multiple rows or columns. A merged area is indexed by its upper left table cell location (row, column) when setting its value or format. The upper left cell of the merged area is always used to set the value and formatting. All other cells in the merged area must be empty strings with no formatting applied.

> To specify a merged area, provide the upper left location where the area starts (row, column) and the length of the area in rows and columns. The following diagram shows an example of these values for a merged area that is 3 rows by 2 columns in size. Note that merged areas can’t overlap with each other.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To specify a merged area, provide the upper left location where the area starts (row, column) and the length of the area in rows and columns. The following diagram shows an example of these values for a merged area that is 3 rows by 2 columns in size. Note that merged areas can't overlap with each other.
```

> Use the `TableAddOptions.mergedAreas` property to specify one or more merged areas. The following code sample shows how to create a table with two merged areas. About the code sample, note the following.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `TableAddOptions.mergedAreas` property to specify one or more merged areas. The following code sample shows how to create a table with two merged areas. About the code sample, note the following:
```

Each merged area must specify the upper left corner location (row, column) and the length in cells of the merged area in terms of row count and column count.  

```javascript
const rowCount = 3;
const columnCount = 4;
// Compact syntax to create a 2D array filled with empty and distinct objects.
const specificCellProperties = Array(rowCount).fill("").map(_ => Array(columnCount).fill("").map(_ => ({})));
const options: PowerPoint.TableAddOptions = {
    values: [
        ["1", "This is a merged cell", "", "4"],
        ["5", "6", "This is also a merged cell", "8"],
        ["9", "10", "", "12"]
    ],
    uniformCellProperties: {
        fill: { color: "darkslateblue" },
        font: { bold: true, color: "white" },
        borders: {
            bottom: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            left: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            right: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3
            },
            top: {
                color: "black",
                weight: 3

>             },

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            }
```

        }
    },
    mergedAreas: [{ rowIndex: 0, columnIndex: 1, rowCount: 1, columnCount: 2 },
    { rowIndex: 1, columnIndex: 2, rowCount: 2, columnCount: 1 }
    ],
    specificCellProperties // Array values are empty objects at this point.
};
// Set fill color for specific cell at row 1, column 1.
options.specificCellProperties[1][1] = {
    fill: { color: "black" }
};
await insertTableOnCurrentSlide(rowCount, columnCount, options);
```

The previous sample creates a table with two merged areas as shown in the following image.

:::image type="content" source="../images/powerpoint-table-merged-cells.png" alt-text="A PowerPoint table showing merged cells.":::

## Get and set table cell values

> After a table is created you can get or set string values in the cells. Note that this is the only part of a table you can change. You can’t change borders, fonts, widths, or other cell properties. If you need to update a table, delete it and recreate it. The following code sample shows how to find an existing table and set a new value for a cell in the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a table is created you can get or set string values in the cells. Note that this is the only part of a table you can change. You can't change borders, fonts, widths, or other cell properties. If you need to update a table, delete it and recreate it. The following code sample shows how to find an existing table and set a new value for a cell in the table.
```
